From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
A major investigation from the Times has
found that government pressure to
perform more and more organ transplants
is creating greater risk for donors and
threatening the overall fairness of the
system.
Today, my colleague, investigative
reporter Brian Rosenthal, on what he's
uncovered.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Wednesday, July 30th.
[Music]
>> Brian, thank you for coming into the
studio.
>> Thanks for having me.
tell us about how this investigation
that you have now been up to for many
many months began.
>> So it began when I got a vague
suggestion from a source that I should
look into the organ transplant system.
>> Something presumably not on your radar.
>> Not at all. And so I ended up going to
this conference, the American Transplant
Congress in Philadelphia last summer
>> and it was a gathering of thousands of
doctors and researchers talking about
all aspects of the transplant system.
You know these conferences are not the
most exciting events in the world. It
was a lot of minutia, a lot of technical
terms. Uh but then I attended one panel
that really stuck with me. Why
>> the panelists were speaking in really
stark terms about the dramatic failings
of the transplant system. One panelist
was talking about how we violated trust
in the system. We violated transparency.
She said we have a system in chaos.
>> Wow.
>> And I wanted to learn what that was
about.
>> Right. That's a pretty damning
assessment of a system that I think most
of us from a distance think of as very
noble.
>> Exactly. So I started to investigate. I
ended up in betting with two organ
procurement organizations. These are the
organizations that coordinate
transplants.
And I saw a lot of good things. The
transplant system performs thousands of
life-saving transplants every year. But
pretty quickly I also started hearing
about problems in the system. Problems
with both how we obtain organs and how
we allocate them to recipients who need
transplants.
>> So at both ends basically of the system,
the beginning and the end.
>> That's right. And in short, I learned
that there are significant problems with
how patients who donate their organs are
treated and also problems with the
fairness of how organs are allocated to
recipients. And I came to understand
that these problems were linked.
>> How so?
>> Well, both problems come back to a push
in the transplant system to increase the
number of transplants.
>> And who's making that push?
>> The government. Okay.
>> It all started with an executive order
that was issued by President Trump back
in 2019.
>> So his first term.
>> That's right. So for years there has
been a long waiting list. There are more
than 100,000 Americans right now who
need a transplant. Mhm. And so the
government under President Trump's first
administration really tried to tackle
that problem by pushing the system to
recover more organs and coordinate more
transplants.
>> Do better, do more.
>> Correct. And one of the biggest
proponents of reforming the system was
Trump's health secretary, Alex Azar.
This was personal to him. his father had
been
>> waiting for a kidney and he had seen the
system as being insufficient. And so he
and President Trump ordered a number of
reforms and the big one was a really
explicit threat to the organ procurement
organizations which arrange all these
transplants
>> saying that if you do not increase the
number of transplants, you are going to
lose your contract. you're not going to
be able to work in this space anymore.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. It was a very direct threat to the
existence of these groups. And so they
reacted by becoming much more aggressive
in pursuing organs and coordinating
transplants. So help me understand how
the government's desire to kick this
system into higher gear and ultimately
of course save more lives. How that
starts to do the two things that you
described a bit earlier. And let's start
with the getting of the organs since it
comes first in the process. So let me
explain how the system works please.
>> There are these organ procurement
organizations that I mentioned. They are
nonprofit groups that exist in every
state and they have employees in
hospitals basically looking for people
who are dying and might be candidates to
donate their organs.
>> So people who have been shooting victims
or drug overdose victims or motor
vehicle crashes who are in the hospital
who are nearing death, the organ
procurement organizations are going to
try to pursue their organs. Mhm.
>> And there are basically two different
ways that they can do that. The normal
way, the way that happens more often is
when the patient becomes brain dead.
This is a patient who has lost all
functioning in their brain permanently.
It's irreversible. It's confirmed by
scientific tests. And the organ
procurement organizations can keep their
organs viable on machines until they're
ready for a transplant. But that is
really the extent of what happens in
that case.
>> Is that the most common form of death at
which point organs are harvested?
>> It's the most common form of donation
and it used to be the only form of
donation.
>> Okay.
>> But more recently and especially after
this executive order, there has been a
growing use of another type of organ
donation called donation after
circulatory death.
>> Donation after circulatory death. And
what is that? How is it different from
getting an organ when someone's brain
dead?
>> It's a totally different process. So,
usually the patient is in a coma. They
have some level of brain activity, but a
doctor has determined that they will
never be able to survive without life
support. And so, the family can
authorize the withdrawal of life support
in order to donate organs. And if that
happens, the patient is taken to an
operating room. The life support is
withdrawn. They wait for the patient's
heart to stop, which means they have
died by circulatory death. And then
after that, they remove the organs. So,
how has this effort from the federal
government to get more organs and more
transplantations
been affecting this second pathway that
you just described? There's been a huge
increase in donation after secretary
death since these regulations came into
effect. Usage has tripled and that's
great for the people who have received
the organs. Some 40,000 people who need
a transplant have gotten one. But
doctors say that there have also been
problems.
>> Mhm. And the reason why is that donation
after circulatory death is just much
less black and white than donation after
brain death. So one of the key things
with donation after circulatory death is
you're supposed to identify a patient
who's on life support and has no chance
of recovering.
>> But that's a medical judgment call.
>> Right. And what we have found in our
reporting is that a growing number of
patients who are being pursued for organ
donation are actually ending up showing
signs of recovering.
>> In other words, they were not headed for
death.
>> Correct.
>> That's a really bracing thing to hear.
Just explain and maybe give an example
of what you're talking about.
>> So the best known case happened a few
years ago in Kentucky. It was a man who
had suffered from an overdose. He had
fallen into a coma. He was not expected
to recover and so his family had
authorized the organ procurement
organization to pursue his organs via
this type of donation.
>> And he was not brain dead.
>> Correct. And so they started testing his
organs. They started lining up
recipients for his organs, lining up
people to do the surgery. And while they
were doing those preparations, he
started opening his eyes. He pulled his
knees to his chest and this was noted
but kind of dismissed as
meaningless body reflexes.
>> Wow.
>> And so they continued moving forward.
They took him into the operating room.
They were about to withdraw his life
support, wait for him to die and take
out the organs.
>> And all of a sudden, one of the doctors
said that they were not comfortable
moving forward. And we actually have
reporting that the procurement
organization wanted to keep moving
forward, but the doctor refused. She put
her foot down and the patient was
returned to his hospital room where
unexpectedly he recovered. Years later,
he is still alive after being minutes
away from dying in the operating room.
>> Wow. Clearly, it's very alarming that a
medical team almost withdrew this
patient's life support, but in the end,
they didn't. That seems important to
highlight.
>> Yeah, that's absolutely true.
>> So, how frequently is a situation like
that occurring where they get real close
to withdrawing life support and it turns
out there are signs of life?
>> Well, there's no official account of
that, but here's what we do know. After
this case was reported, the federal
government did an investigation in
Kentucky and they looked at 350 cases
where plans to retrieve organs were
cancelled at the last moment. And what
they found was that in 73 of those
cases, they stopped at the last minute,
but they should have stopped much sooner
because the patient was showing signs of
regaining consciousness sooner and those
signs were initially ignored. So, what
have you come to understand about why a
group of doctors and nurses would be
missing signs of life? I keep thinking
about anytime I've been in a hospital
and there are machines after machines on
the wall telling you about people's
vital signs. So, it this seems a little
hard to understand. Well, the vital
signs are staying consistent because
they're on ventilators. They're on
machines. You're really looking for
signs of brain activity.
>> And it turns out that can be quite
subtle. And so, yes, doctors are
supposed to be looking for these signs,
but instead of doing that, once the
patient has been authorized for organ
donation,
>> the system kind of sees them as an organ
donor and
>> they put on blinders.
>> That's exactly right. We talked to
nurses, doctors, organ procurement
employees all around the country who all
said that this system is not working as
well as it should. And we confirmed a
dozen cases in which patients endured
either premature or bungled attempts to
retrieve their organs
>> separate from those in Kentucky.
>> Correct.
>> Huh.
>> In nine other states, different types of
patients and different types of
mistakes.
>> I mean, how should we think about this?
Because at the end of the day, these
almost horrifying outcomes were averted.
We don't know and maybe it's not
knowable whether anyone had their life
support withdrawn when they might have
made a full recovery.
>> We don't know. I think it's impossible
to know. But I can say that we did speak
with a lot of doctors and nurses who
felt that that has happened. And they
say given how much this donation type
has increased in the last few years and
the subjectivity, they think it's hard
to imagine that this has not happened.
>> And how much do all the folks that
you've spoken to who are involved in
this attribute what you're describing to
the federal government asking demanding
really more organs?
>> Almost everybody blames those
regulations.
They say that ever since they've gone
into effect, the organ procurement
organizations have become very
aggressive. That they want to get as
many organs as possible. They want to
save lives and that as a result, they're
pushing the limits.
>> Good intentions in this case, they seem
to be saying, are leading to greater
risk.
>> And remember, that is only the first
half of the problem.
Our reporting also found that these
regulations have had an effect on the
fairness of who gets all of these
organs,
which is what we're going to talk about
after the break. We'll be right back.
[Music]
So Brian, explain how these pressures
from the federal government to get more
organs, which you've already described
as influencing the first half of this
process, the getting of the organs, how
they have exerted pressure on the second
half, the process of placing organs into
the patients who need them. So basically
these regulations have led the
procurement organizations to
try to allocate as many organs as
quickly as they can and that has led
them to look for ways to cut corners and
to not follow the rules. So you've
probably heard of the organ waiting
list, but there actually is not one
official list of everybody in the
country who needs an organ. It's not
like you're number 1,00 today and you'll
be number 999 tomorrow.
>> Mhm.
>> There is a pool of people who need an
organ. And every time an organ becomes
available, there is a unique list that
is generated for that organ
>> of the people who first of all are the
best match, who are the right size, who
are the right blood type, who are close
by, and also who have been deemed by the
system to be most deserving of that
organ.
>> And how's that determination made? It's
an algorithm and the biggest factors are
how long you've been waiting and how
sick you are.
>> Seems pretty straightforward. Basically,
anytime an organ, a liver, a kidney, a
heart becomes available, you're saying
the system creates this smaller list
from the pool you just described.
>> Exactly. And so once that smaller list
for that specific organ is created, it
is the job of the procurement
organization to go down the list
starting with the very first person on
the list. And it's spelled out actually
how they do that. They don't contact the
patient. They contact the patient's
doctor. The patient's doctor has 30
minutes to respond yes or no. If they
say no, which does happen, the
procurement organization is supposed to
go to the second person on the list and
make that offer. They've got 30 minutes
to respond, then they go to the next
person. And the underlying principle of
all of this is fairness, which is
extremely important to the system. I
mean, you can imagine if we didn't have
rules, the best heart could go to the
wealthiest donor to the hospital,
>> the member of the board.
>> Correct. It's also worth noting that
following these steps is federally
required. These steps are spelled out in
regulations.
>> Okay, so we're back to our thesis here.
How has this new push from the federal
government to do more in this space
influenced the fairness of this all? So
instead of calling number one on the
list, taking the chance that they say
no, then having to call the next person,
maybe they'll say no. Instead of waiting
and going through that process, they
have come up with a new plan called out
ofsequence allocation,
>> which is when they simply call up a
hospital that they have a relationship
with and say, "Hey, we have an organ.
You can put it into any one of your
patients."
>> And what did you find in your reporting
about how frequently this alternative
process is happening? So today, nearly
20% of organs do not go to the people at
the top of the list. And back in 2020,
it was only 3%.
>> Wow.
>> I heard many, many stories about people
being skipped over. And one that really
stuck with me was about a teenager named
Marcus who lives in Michigan.
Marcus has been fighting kidney trouble
his whole life.
He'd been waiting for nearly a decade
for a transplant and he had a unique
medical condition which meant that he
was not a match for very many organs.
>> Okay.
>> And then last spring his doctor called
to say that there was a match. Uh he was
on the top of the list. This kidney had
been in Illinois. It was supposed to be
used in another procedure but that had
fallen through. And so Marcus was next
up. Uh he and his family were really
excited. They rushed to his hospital in
Michigan to prepare for the surgery, but
the kidney did not go to him that night.
And it didn't go to the next person on
the list or the next person after that.
>> Wow.
That very much sounds like a list being
ignored, skipped. So what did you find
actually happened there? Well, the
procurement organization knowing that
the kidney was already at the University
of Illinois ended up saying to that
hospital, "Hey, why don't you keep it?
Just give it to whichever patient you
want." And they ended up putting the
kidney into a patient who had only been
waiting for a few months. They were
number 3,558
on the list.
>> That's stunning. And I want to better
understand it. In your reporting, did
you come to the conclusion that the
procurement organization was worried,
for instance, that transporting this
kidney from Illinois to Michigan
was going to take so long that the
kidney would deteriorate? I mean, was a
factor like that at play? So, they said
they had to place this kidney quickly,
that kidneys are only viable outside the
body for a certain amount of time, which
didn't really seem like a reasonable
explanation.
>> Why?
>> Well, Illinois is not that far away from
Michigan. The kidney had only been
outside the body for about 9 or 10 hours
at that point, and kidneys remain viable
for up to 48 hours. And so they had
plenty of time to send that kidney down
the road. In fact, Marcus' doctor had
even called and offered that he would
drive down and pick it up himself.
>> Wow. From Michigan to Illinois to get it
from Marcus.
>> That's right. But the OPO had decided
that they just wanted to give it to the
University of Illinois and be done with
it. So that makes me wonder what if any
ramifications are there for a
procurement organization like this one
that breaks the federal rules, skips the
line over someone like Marcus, does it
face any consequences? So every time
there's a violation, the case is flagged
for review. But what we found in our
reporting is that basically nobody ever
gets in trouble for this. More than
99.5%
of the time the case is closed without
any action. And the reason for that is
that the transplant system basically
polices itself and it has no incentive
to penalize one of its own members.
>> What was the reaction from Marcus'
family to this sequence of events that
you just described?
>> Well, they didn't know about all that
information I just told you. They knew
that they didn't get the transplant, but
they they didn't know that they'd been
skipped.
>> And so I went to their house and
>> met with them and told them everything
that we knew. It was heartbreaking. And
we told them where that kidney had
ultimately gone to.
And the family was just devastated.
Marcus' mom actually said to me, "What
made them decide that Marcus wasn't good
enough for that kidney?" For everyone in
Marcus' family, this is just very hard
to make sense of. How is Marcus now?
>> So, Marcus was ultimately able to get a
transplant a couple months after this
all happened. He did get a kidney, but
it was not as good of a kidney. It came
from somebody who was older that wasn't
as perfect of a match
>> as the one he didn't get.
>> Correct. And so that kidney is not doing
so well. In fact, it's not really
functioning at all and he is going to
have to get back on the transplant list
and and wait for a new one.
>> That's really heartbreaking.
Brian, putting aside for just a moment
the specifics of this kidney and of
Marcus, is there evidence that when
procurement organizations skip the line,
they're more effective at getting organs
placed in patients? No, there is not. In
the transplant system, there is a
closely watched metric called the
discord rate, which is the percentage of
organs that are recovered that do not
end up getting transplanted. And you
would expect that if the skipping the
line is so effective at getting more
organs placed, then the discard rate
would be going down. And that is not
happening. The national discard rate is
not going down. And in fact, the
procurement organizations that are
skipping the list the most do not have a
lower discard rate than the ones that
are not skipping the list as much.
>> And it also leads to some measurable
bias.
>> H explain that.
>> Well, when procurement organizations
skip the list, our reporting found that
organs disproportionately go to white
men, to Asians, and to people with
college degrees. As one doctor put it to
me, this is why we have policies in
place to root out these biases and make
sure that the system is fair. I'm
curious what the federal government's
response has been to your investigation
because what the reporting clearly
demonstrates is that the actions of the
first Trump administration is
encouraging these procurement
organizations
to increasingly ignore the lines and be
much more aggressive with how they're
trying to procure the organs. And since
Trump is now president again, are you
finding that the regulators working for
him are defensive of the system or are
they open to the idea that the actions
they took in the first term have now
created a set of problems?
>> The Trump administration has been very
responsive to our findings on both of
these issues. When we contacted them
about the issue of line skipping, they
immediately sent a letter to the
transplant system saying that this was a
big problem and that new policies needed
to be written to address these issues.
And as for the aggressively procuring
organs from donation after circulatory
death, they have cracked down on the
procurement organization in Kentucky and
they have ordered the transplant system
to write new guidelines around donation
after circulatory death nationwide.
>> Wow. They're taking it very seriously.
>> Yes. And they're being pushed to take it
very seriously by Congress. The
subcommittee on oversight and
investigations will now come to order.
>> So last week in the house there was a
hearing of the committee that oversees
the transplant system.
>> The New York Times has written on chaos
in the waiting list due
>> and lawmakers in both parties were
mentioning our reporting.
>> A recent investigative report
highlighting one of the most horrific
cases of patient abuses
>> were asking hard questions of the
transplant system officials. Were those
protocols in place?
>> They were.
>> And why were they not followed?
>> And we're calling for reform.
>> If you see a patient crying, if you see
these kind of neurologic responses, the
process should be immediately stopped.
Do you agree?
>> I agree.
>> You know, it strikes me that a lot of
people listening to this conversation
are going to remember, as I have
that I'm an organ donor. I mean, I have
it right here on my driver's license,
the heart. A lot of us are organ donors,
proudly. And in becoming an organ donor,
we have entrusted ourselves, our organs,
perhaps even the process by which our
life ultimately ends to the system that
you have been investigating.
So, should what you have found here
change how we think about that decision
being an organ donor?
I think that being an organ donor is a
beautiful gift and the whole system is
based on that act of giving. It's a
system that saves thousands of lives
every year. But you know, as we've
talked about today, the system is also
under strain and seems like this is a
rare issue where there is bipartisan
support toward the idea that something
needs to be done.
And it's never going to be perfect. This
is a system that will always have people
making tough decisions under pressure.
But we'll see if these fixes can help
because what everybody wants is to honor
that tremendous gift of organ donation.
>> Well, Brian, thank you very much.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's
[Music]
what else you need to know.
The gunman who killed four people in a
Midtown Manhattan office building on
Monday was carrying a note that
criticized the National Football League,
the apparent target of his shooting, and
claimed that he had developed a
degenerative brain disease from playing
the sport.
Police said that the shooter's plan to
target the NFL was thwarted after he
entered an elevator bank that did not
have access to the league's offices.
And Representative Marjgerie Taylor
Green of Georgia, a close ally of
President Trump, became the first member
of her party in Congress to call
Israel's conduct in Gaza a genocide. In
a post on social media, Representative
Green said that the October 7th attacks
against Israel were quote horrific, but
so is the genocide, humanitarian crisis,
and starvation happening in Gaza.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Olivia
Nat and Anna Foley. It was edited by
Patricia Willins and Brendan
Clinkenberg. contains original music by
Dan Powell, Marian Lozano, and Rowan
Yumisto and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansf of Wonderland.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Michael
Bavaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]